:memo: Rework data, code and service export page (#2707)
platformsh/platformsh-docs: docs/src/tutorials/exporting.md

---
title: "Exporting data"
description: See how to export your code, files and service data.
---

As a Platform.sh user, your code and data belong to you.
At any time, you can download your site's data for local development, to back up your data, or to change provider.
## Before you begin

You need:

- [Git](https://git-scm.com/downloads)
- A Platform.sh account
- Code in your project
- Optional: the [Platform.sh CLI](../administration/cli/_index.md)

## 1. Download your app's code

Your app's code is maintained through the Git version control system.

To download your entire app's code history:

{{< codetabs >}}

---
title=Using the CLI
file=none
highlight=false
---

> 1. List all your projects with:

Reviewer: :clipboard: The code block shouldn't be thought of as a part of this sentence. The current sentence is incomplete without the code block, so it's not optimal.
```suggestion
1. List all your projects by running the following command:
```

   ```bash
   platform projects
   ```

> 2. Retrieve the project you want to back up with:

Reviewer: :clipboard: 
```suggestion
2. Retrieve the project you want to back up by running the following command:
```

   ```bash
   platform get {{< variable "PROJECT_ID" >}}
   ```

<--->

---
title=Using Git
file=none
highlight=false
---

1. In the [Console](https://console.platform.sh/), open your project and click **Code {{< icon chevron >}}**.
2. Click **Git**.

> 3. To copy the command, click **{{< icon copy >}}**.

Reviewer: :clipboard: This is for accessibility.
```suggestion
3. To copy the command, click **{{< icon copy >}} Copy**.
```

> 4. To clone the repository, run a command similar to the following:

Reviewer: :clipboard: Having it as a separate step makes it seem like it's not the command you're copying
```suggestion
  The command is similar to the following:
```

   ```text
   git clone abcdefgh1234567@git.eu.platform.sh:abcdefgh1234567.git project-name
   ```

{{< /codetabs >}}

## 2. Download your files

Some files might not be stored in Git,
such as data your app writes [in mounts](../create-apps/app-reference.md#mounts).

To download your files:

> {{< codetabs >}}

Reviewer: :question: Could the entire step could be replaced by links to relevant sections of the transfer files page? Both ways are explained there.

---
title=Using the CLI
file=none
highlight=false
---

> 1. Get a list of all your mounts with:

Reviewer: :clipboard: 
```suggestion
1. Get a list of all your mounts by running the following command:
```

   ```bash
   platform mount:list
   ```

> 2. Download all of your files from a given mount with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Download all of your files from a given mount by running the following command:
```

   ```bash
   platform mount:download --mount {{< variable "MOUNT_PATH" >}} --target ./{{< variable "LOCAL_FOLDER" >}}
   ```

<--->

---
title=Using SSH
file=none
highlight=false
---

> You can transfer files through SSH using `scp` or `rsync`.

Reviewer: :lady_beetle: This is not instructions on how to do something.

{{< /codetabs >}}

For more examples, see how to [transfer files to and from a built app](../development/file-transfer.md).

## 3. Download data from services

The mechanism for downloading from each service (such as your database) varies.

For services designed to hold non-persistent data, such as [Redis](../add-services/redis.md) or [Solr](../add-services/solr.md),
it's generally not necessary to download data as it can be rebuilt from the primary data store.

For services designed to hold persistent data, see each service's page for instructions:

- [MySQL](../add-services/mysql/_index.md#exporting-data)
- [PostgreSQL](../add-services/postgresql.md#exporting-data)
- [MongoDB](../add-services/mongodb.md#exporting-data)
- [InfluxDB](../add-services/influxdb.md#exporting-data)

> ## 4. Get the environment variables

Reviewer: :clipboard: 
```suggestion
## 4. Get environment variables
```

Environment variables can contain critical information such as tokens or additional configuration options for your app.

> Environment variables beginning with:

Reviewer: :lady_beetle: As with code blocks, the introductory sentence should stand alone: https://developers.google.com/style/lists#introductory-sentences-for-lists The current phrasing is rather confusing for a list.

- `env:` are exposed [as Unix environment variables](../development/variables/_index.md#top-level-environment-variables).
- `php:` are interpreted [as `php.ini` directives](../development/variables/_index.md#php-specific-variables).

All other variables are [part of `$PLATFORM_VARIABLES`](../development/variables/use-variables.md#use-platformsh-provided-variables).

To back up your environment variables:

{{< codetabs >}}

---
title=Using the CLI
file=none
highlight=false
---

> 1. Get the variable's values with:

Reviewer: :clipboard: 
```suggestion
1. Get the variable's values by running the following command:
```

   ```bash
   platform ssh --project {{< variable "PROJECT_ID" >}} --environment {{< variable "ENVIRONMENT" >}} -- 'echo $PLATFORM_VARIABLES | base64 -d | jq'
   ```

>    Note that you can also get all the environment variable values, with:

Reviewer 2: 📋 
```suggestion
   Note that you can also get all the environment variable values with:
```

   ```bash
   platform ssh --project {{< variable "PROJECT_ID" >}} --environment {{< variable "ENVIRONMENT" >}} -- env
   ```

2. Store the data on your local computer, for example in an encrypted text file for sensitive tokens.

<--->

---
title=In the Console
file=none
highlight=false
---

1. In the [Console](https://console.platform.sh/), open your project and click **{{< icon settings >}}**.
2. Click **Project Settings {{< icon chevron >}}**.
3. Click **Variables** and access your variable's values and settings.

> 4. Store the data on your local computer, for example in an encrypted text file for sensitive tokens.

Reviewer: :clipboard: 
```suggestion
4. Store the data on your local computer, such as in an encrypted text file for sensitive tokens.
```

Reviewer: :hammer_and_wrench: 
```suggestion

Store the data somewhere secure on your computer.
```

> Note that in the Console, you can't access the value of variables that have been created using the [`--sensitive true` flag](../development/variables/set-variables.md#variable-options).

Reviewer: :hammer_and_wrench: Given that you're talking about in the Console, it's not ideal to describe it in terms of CLI flags.
```suggestion
Note that in the Console, you can't access the value of variables that have [marked as sensitive](../development/variables/set-variables.md#variable-options).
```

> Use the CLI instead to retrieve these values.

Reviewer: :clipboard: 
```suggestion
Use the CLI to retrieve these values.
```

{{< /codetabs >}}

## What's next

> - Set up your [local development environment](../development/local/_index.md)
> - Migrate to [another region](../projects/region-migration.md)

Reviewer: :clipboard: 
```suggestion
- Set up your [local development environment](../development/local/_index.md).
- Migrate to [another region](../projects/region-migration.md).
```

Reviewer: Not totally sure what the first has to do with this. More context might help?

Reviewer: Seems like it'd make sense to include the guide mentioned in the issue: https://docs.platform.sh/tutorials/migrating.html

---
title: "Exporting data"
description: See how to export your code, files and service's data.
---

> Platform.sh never wants to lock you in to our service.

Reviewer: I'd just note this tone of voice is one of the things we're looking to try to get rid of in the rework. There's a reason it got flagged in the linting.

Author: I thought that in that case it wasn't too condescending and a good way to talk about values and against vendor lock-in.

> Platform.sh never wants to lock you in to our service.
> Your code and your data belong to you,
> and you should always be able to download your site's data for local development,
> backup, or to "take your data elsewhere".

Reviewer 2: 🛠️ A suggestion to make the introduction shorter, more user-focused/straightforward and get rid of the conditional ("should" => https://developers.google.com/style/word-list#letter-s). What do you think?

```suggestion
As a Platform.sh user, your code and data belong to you.
At any time, you can download your site's data for local development,
backup, or to change provider.
```

Reviewer 2: Just realized I should have removed the last comma (before "or") in my suggestion.

Reviewer 2: Updated suggestion following conversation with Aaron (the comma does have its place here, but the syntax can be improved).

## Before you begin

> You need:

Reviewer 2: 😍 I like that you made the list items as short as possible. I should strive to do that as well.

- [Git](https://git-scm.com/downloads)
- A Platform.sh account
- Code in your project
- Optional: the [Platform.sh CLI](../administration/cli/_index.md)

## 1. Download your app's code

> Your app code is maintained through the Git version control system.

Reviewer 2: 💅  For consistency with the header.

```suggestion
Your app's code is maintained through the Git version control system.
```

To download your entire app's code history:

{{< codetabs >}}

---
title=Using the CLI
file=none
highlight=false
---

1. List all your projects with:

   ```bash
   platform projects
   ```

> 2. Retrieve the project you want to backup with:

Reviewer 2: 📋  English nerd is back 🤓 . When used as a noun = backup, when used as a verb = to back up. 

```suggestion
2. Retrieve the project you want to back up with:
```

   ```bash
   platform get {{< variable "PROJECT_ID" >}}
   ```

<--->

---
title=Using Git
file=none
highlight=false
---

1. In the [Console](https://console.platform.sh/), open your project and click **Code {{< icon chevron >}}**.
2. Click **Git**.

> 3. Click **{{< icon copy >}}** to copy the command.

Reviewer 2: 🛠️ Related to [clause order guidelines](https://developers.google.com/style/clause-order).

```suggestion
3. To copy the command, click **{{< icon copy >}}**.
```

> 4. Run the command to clone the repository.
>    It looks similar to the following:

Reviewer 2: 🛠️  Clause order + simplified 1-sentence instruction.

```suggestion
4. To clone the repository, run a command similar to the following:
```

   ```text
   git clone abcdefgh1234567@git.eu.platform.sh:abcdefgh1234567.git project-name
   ```

{{< /codetabs >}}

## 2. Download your files

Some files might not be stored in Git,
such as data your app writes [in mounts](../create-apps/app-reference.md#mounts).

To download your files:

{{< codetabs >}}

---
title=Using the CLI
file=none
highlight=false
---

> 1. Get a list of all your mounts:

Reviewer 2: 💅 For consistency throughout the page.

```suggestion
1. Get a list of all your mounts with:
```

   ```bash
   platform mount:list
   ```

> 2. Download all of your files from a given mount:

Reviewer 2: 💅 For consistency throughout the page.

```suggestion
2. Download all of your files from a given mount with:
```

   ```bash
   platform mount:download --mount {{< variable "MOUNT_PATH" >}} --target ./{{< variable "LOCAL_FOLDER" >}}
   ```

<--->

---
title=Using SSH
file=none
highlight=false
---

> See how to transfer files [using `scp`](../development/file-transfer.md#scp) or [`rsync`](../development/file-transfer.md#rsync).

Reviewer 2: ❓ In the output, the links aren't obvious due to the formatting of the words `scp` and `rsync`.
Maybe you could state: "You can transfer files using `scp`or `rsync`, and then rely on the link just below to direct the users to the whole file transfer page? 🤔

{{< /codetabs >}}

> For more examples, see how to [transfer files to and from a built app](../development/file-transfer.md).

Reviewer 2: 😍 Nice one!

## 3. Download data from services

The mechanism for downloading from each service (such as your database) varies.

> For services designed to hold non-persistent data, such as Redis or Solr,

Reviewer 2: 💅 How about we link to the main Redis and Solr pages here?

it's generally not necessary to download data as it can be rebuilt from the primary data store.

For services designed to hold persistent data, see each service's page for instructions:

- [MySQL](../add-services/mysql/_index.md#exporting-data)
- [PostgreSQL](../add-services/postgresql.md#exporting-data)
- [MongoDB](../add-services/mongodb.md#exporting-data)
- [InfluxDB](../add-services/influxdb.md#exporting-data)

## 4. Get the environment variables

Environment variables can contain critical information such as tokens or additional configuration options for your app.

Environment variables beginning with:

- `env:` are exposed [as Unix environment variables](../development/variables/_index.md#top-level-environment-variables).
- `php:` are interpreted [as `php.ini` directives](../development/variables/_index.md#php-specific-variables).

All other variables are [part of `$PLATFORM_VARIABLES`](../development/variables/use-variables.md#use-platformsh-provided-variables).

> To backup your environment variables:

Reviewer 2: 📋 🤓 Howdy, me again, how you doin'?

```suggestion
To back up your environment variables:
```

{{< codetabs >}}

---
title=Using the CLI
file=none
highlight=false
---

> 1. Get the variable's values, by running:

Reviewer 2: 💅 Consistency purposes.

```suggestion
1. Get the variable's values with:
```

   ```bash
   platform ssh --project {{< variable "PROJECT_ID" >}} --environment {{< variable "ENVIRONMENT" >}} -- 'echo $PLATFORM_VARIABLES | base64 -d | jq'
   ```

> 2. Optional: To get all the environment variable values, run:

Reviewer 2: ❓ Is this really an optional second step or just an alternative to the first step? (=> Honest question, are users really likely to do number 1 **then** number 2, or rather number 1 **or** number 2?). 
If the latter is true, instead of having the optional 2nd step, I might add a note after the first command. Something like: "Note that you can also get all the environment variable values with + command". And then move on to the 3rd step. What do you think?

   ```bash
   platform ssh --project {{< variable "PROJECT_ID" >}} --environment {{< variable "ENVIRONMENT" >}} -- env
   ```

> 3. Store the data on your local computer in the way you see fit, for example in an encrypted text file for sensitive tokens.

Reviewer 2: 💅 Just an idea to simplify further.

```suggestion
3. Store the data on your local computer, for example in an encrypted text file for sensitive tokens.
```

<--->

---
title=In the Console
file=none
highlight=false
---

1. In the [Console](https://console.platform.sh/), open your project and click **{{< icon settings >}}**.
2. Click **Project Settings {{< icon chevron >}}**.
3. Click **Variables** and access your variable's values and settings.

> 4. Store the data on your local computer in the way you see fit, for example in an encrypted text file for sensitive tokens.

Reviewer 2: 💅 Same suggestion as above.

```suggestion
4. Store the data on your local computer, for example in an encrypted text file for sensitive tokens.
```
